Add .NET metrics (#283)
open-telemetry/semantic-conventions: docs/dotnet/dotnet-kestrel-metrics.md

different processes could be listening on TCP port 12345 and UDP port 12345.

**[2]:** The value SHOULD be normalized to lowercase.

**[3]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, `server.address` SHOULD represent the server address behind any intermediaries, for example proxies, if it's available.

**[4]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, `server.port` SHOULD represent the server port behind any intermediaries, for example proxies, if it's available.

`network.transport` has the following list of well-known values. If one of them applies, then the respective value MUST be used, otherwise a custom value MAY be used.

| Value  | Description |
|---|---|
| `tcp` | TCP |
| `udp` | UDP |
| `pipe` | Named or anonymous pipe. |
| `unix` | Unix domain socket |

`network.type` has the following list of well-known values. If one of them applies, then the respective value MUST be used, otherwise a custom value MAY be used.

| Value  | Description |
|---|---|
| `ipv4` | IPv4 |
| `ipv6` | IPv6 |
<!-- endsemconv -->

## Metric: `kestrel.connection.duration`

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

This metric SHOULD be specified with
[`ExplicitBucketBoundaries`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/v1.26.0/specification/metrics/api.md#instrument-advisory-parameters)
of `[ 0, 0.01, 0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10, 30, 60, 120, 300 ]`.

```

different processes could be listening on TCP port 12345 and UDP port 12345.

**[2]:** The value SHOULD be normalized to lowercase.

**[3]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, `server.address` SHOULD represent the server address behind any intermediaries, for example proxies, if it's available.

**[4]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, `server.port` SHOULD represent the server port behind any intermediaries, for example proxies, if it's available.

`network.transport` has the following list of well-known values. If one of them applies, then the respective value MUST be used, otherwise a custom value MAY be used.

| Value  | Description |
|---|---|
| `tcp` | TCP |
| `udp` | UDP |
| `pipe` | Named or anonymous pipe. |
| `unix` | Unix domain socket |

`network.type` has the following list of well-known values. If one of them applies, then the respective value MUST be used, otherwise a custom value MAY be used.

| Value  | Description |
|---|---|
| `ipv4` | IPv4 |
| `ipv6` | IPv6 |
<!-- endsemconv -->

## Metric: `kestrel.tls_handshake.duration`

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

This metric SHOULD be specified with
[`ExplicitBucketBoundaries`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/v1.26.0/specification/metrics/api.md#instrument-advisory-parameters)
of `[ 0.005, 0.01, 0.025, 0.05, 0.075, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10 ]`.

```

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: Kestrel
--->

# Semantic Conventions for Kestrel web server metrics

**Status**: [Stable][DocumentStatus]

This article defines semantic conventions for Kestrel web server.

<!-- toc -->

- [Kestrel endpoint](#kestrel-endpoint)
- [Metric: `kestrel.active_connections`](#metric-kestrelactive_connections)
- [Metric: `kestrel.connection.duration`](#metric-kestrelconnectionduration)

> - [Metric: `kestrel.rejected_connections`](#metric-kestrelrejected_connections)

Reviewer 2: One theme I'm noticing here (and I realize this is what .NET currently produces, so not suggestion a change):

There's a lot of these UpDownCounters with `active_*`, `queued_*`, etc.

In OTEL semantic conventions, we tend to try to use labels with meaningful sums where appropriate, e.g. the `usage` and `time` conventions:

However, the overall rule is:

> ["As a rule of thumb, aggregations over all the attributes of a given metric SHOULD be meaningful,"](https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/naming/#metric-names) as Prometheus recommends.

My question for .NET (as a naive, non .NET user) ->  Should `active`, `rejected`, `queued` and `upgraded` be labels on a `connections` metric, or is this not meaningful when aggregated?

Author: Great point. 

I see the following opportunity: `kestrel.active_connections`, `kestrel.queued_connections` and maybe ``kestrel.upgraded_connections` could be grouped together (they are updowncounters with the same unit and set of attributes). Rejected connection is a total counter and can't be reported along with them.

These 3 could be measured with something like `kestrel.current.connections` or `kestrel.connections` and additional attribute like `kestrel.connection.state` = `active` | `queued`.

If my understanding of upgrades is correct, then upgraded connections are first counted in active ones and upgrade happens after the connection is established. If we added it to `kestrel.connections`, it'd need to be expressed by a different attribute with some questionable logic:
- `-1` updowncounter when upgrade is done
- `+1` immediately with an extra attribute like `http.protocol.initial_version = 1.1`  and new value of `network.protocol.version = 2`

It looks a bit unusual and surprising, so I'm not sure if `kestrel.upgraded_connections` makes sense in this group. 

Having said that, this ship has already sailed, but I created this issue https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/issues/52437 for .NET team for the reference and to consider changing it in the future.

Author: /fyi @JamesNK

# Semantic Conventions for Kestrel web server metrics emitted by .NET

**Status**: [Experimental, Feature-freeze][DocumentStatus]

This document defines semantic conventions for Kestrel web server.

<!-- toc -->

- [Kestrel endpoint](#kestrel-endpoint)
- [Metric: `kestrel.active_connections`](#metric-kestrelactive_connections)
- [Metric: `kestrel.connection.duration`](#metric-kestrelconnectionduration)
- [Metric: `kestrel.rejected_connections`](#metric-kestrelrejected_connections)
- [Metric: `kestrel.queued_connections`](#metric-kestrelqueued_connections)
- [Metric: `kestrel.queued_requests`](#metric-kestrelqueued_requests)
- [Metric: `kestrel.upgraded_connections`](#metric-kestrelupgraded_connections)
- [Metric: `kestrel.tls_handshake.duration`](#metric-kestreltls_handshakeduration)
- [Metric: `kestrel.active_tls_handshakes`](#metric-kestrelactive_tls_handshakes)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Kestrel endpoint

Kestrel endpoint is represented with [`System.Net.EndPoint`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.endpoint) class,

> which does not always provide information about server address or port.

Reviewer 3: Do a global search and replace on the `/en` language identifier. Non-English folks will thank you.

> which does not always provide information about server address or port.

Reviewer 4: Remove /en-us, not just /en

Instrumentation supports `IPEndPoint`, `UnixDomainSocketEndPoint`, and `NamedPipeEndPoint` and sets `server.address`, `server.port` (for IP endpoint), `network.type`, and `network.transport` attributes from corresponding endpoint on Kestrel metrics.

In case instrumentation does not recognize `EndPoint` implementation, it sets `server.address` attribute to `endpoint.ToString()` value
and `network.transport` value to corresponding `endpoint.AddressFamily` property.

## Metric: `kestrel.active_connections`

<!-- semconv metric.kestrel.active_connections(metric_table) -->
| Name     | Instrument Type | Unit (UCUM) | Description    |
| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- |
| `kestrel.active_connections` | UpDownCounter | `{connection}` | Number of connections that are currently active on the server. [1] |

**[1]:** Meter name: `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Server.Kestrel`; Added in: ASP.NET Core 8.0
<!-- endsemconv -->

<!-- semconv metric.kestrel.active_connections(full) -->
| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|

> | [`network.transport`](../general/attributes.md) | string | [OSI transport layer](https://osi-model.com/transport-layer/) or [inter-process communication method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inter-process_communication). [1] | `tcp`; `unix` | Recommended |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| [`network.transport`](../general/attributes.md) | string | [OSI transport layer](https://osi-model.com/transport-layer/) or [inter-process communication method](https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Inter-process_communication). [1] | `tcp`; `unix` | Recommended |
```
This would be a good global search and replace. I assume you copied this from opentelemetry. We only use wikipedia if there are no alternatives.

> | [`network.type`](../general/attributes.md) | string | [OSI network layer](https://osi-model.com/network-layer/) or non-OSI equivalent. [2] | `ipv4`; `ipv6` | Recommended: if the transport is `tcp` or `udp` |

Author: I'm trying it out here - https://github.com/open-telemetry/build-tools/pull/222, not sure I like it

[Attribute requirement level](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/common/attribute-requirement-level.md) is a specific thing. It's not intended to be read as plain English. 

I hope at some point we can add a link to the requirement level definitions, but without `:` things like `Conditionally Required if available` don't look right.

Let me know if you have any suggestions.

> | [`network.type`](../general/attributes.md) | string | [OSI network layer](https://osi-model.com/network-layer/) or non-OSI equivalent. [2] | `ipv4`; `ipv6` | Recommended: if the transport is `tcp` or `udp` |

Reviewer 3: What about `Recommended` or `Recommended:` given it's similar to a enum

I didn't know it was from a set of requirement levels, I thought it was just an adjective.

> | [`network.type`](../general/attributes.md) | string | [OSI network layer](https://osi-model.com/network-layer/) or non-OSI equivalent. [2] | `ipv4`; `ipv6` | Recommended: if the transport is `tcp` or `udp` |

Author: Makes sense and it'd be great to point to requirement-level definitions, I prototyped this one and kinda like it.

| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | [Requirement Level](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/common/attribute-requirement-level.md) |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `foo.bar` | string | Attribute 1 | `baz` | `Recommended` if available |
| `foo.qux` | int | Attribute 2 | `42` | `Conditionally Required` if available |

Let me resolve this comment here and I'll follow-up on the build-tools PR.

> | [`server.address`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Server address - domain name if available without reverse DNS lookup, otherwise IP address or Unix domain socket name. [3] | `example.com`; `10.1.2.80`; `/tmp/my.sock` | Recommended |

Author: addressed in #415

| [`server.port`](../general/attributes.md) | int | Server port number. [4] | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Recommended |

**[1]:** The value SHOULD be normalized to lowercase.

Consider always setting the transport when setting a port number, since
a port number is ambiguous without knowing the transport, for example

> different processes could be listening on TCP port 12345 and UDP port 12345.

Author: same as above - does not matter in rendered markdown and sometimes too hard to do.

**[2]:** The value SHOULD be normalized to lowercase.

**[3]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, `server.address` SHOULD represent
the server address behind any intermediaries (e.g. proxies) if it's available.

**[4]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, `server.port` SHOULD represent the server port behind any intermediaries (e.g. proxies) if it's available.

`network.transport` has the following list of well-known values. If one of them applies, then the respective value MUST be used, otherwise a custom value MAY be used.

| Value  | Description |
|---|---|
| `tcp` | TCP |
| `udp` | UDP |

> | `pipe` | Named or anonymous pipe. See note below. |

Author: #415

| [`network.transport`](../general/attributes.md) | string | [OSI transport layer](https://osi-model.com/transport-layer/) or [inter-process communication method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inter-process_communication). [4] | `tcp`; `unix` | Recommended |
| [`network.type`](../general/attributes.md) | string | [OSI network layer](https://osi-model.com/network-layer/) or non-OSI equivalent. [5] | `ipv4`; `ipv6` | Recommended: if the transport is `tcp` or `udp` |
| [`server.address`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Server address - domain name if available without reverse DNS lookup, otherwise IP address or Unix domain socket name. [6] | `example.com`; `10.1.2.80`; `/tmp/my.sock` | Recommended |
| [`server.port`](../general/attributes.md) | int | Server port number. [7] | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Recommended |
| `tls.protocol.version` | string | TLS protocol version. | `1.2`; `1.3` | Conditionally Required: if the connection is secured with TLS. |

**[1]:** The `error.type` SHOULD be predictable and SHOULD have low cardinality.
Instrumentations SHOULD document the list of errors they report.

> The cardinality of `error.type` within one instrumentation library SHOULD be low, but
> telemetry consumers that aggregate data from multiple instrumentation libraries and applications
> should be prepared for `error.type` to have high cardinality at query time, when no
> additional filters are applied.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The cardinality of `error.type` within one instrumentation library SHOULD be low. Telemetry consumers that aggregate data from multiple instrumentation libraries and applications should be prepared for `error.type` to have high cardinality at query time, when no additional filters are applied.
```

If the operation has completed successfully, instrumentations SHOULD NOT set `error.type`.

> If a specific domain defines its own set of error identifiers (such as HTTP or gRPC status codes),
> it's RECOMMENDED to use a domain-specific attribute and also set `error.type` to capture
> all errors, regardless of whether they are defined within the domain-specific set or not.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If a specific domain defines its own set of error identifiers such as HTTP or gRPC status codes, it's RECOMMENDED to:
* Use a domain-specific attribute.
* Set the `error.type` to capture on all errors.

The preceding recommendation applies regardless of whether they are defined within the domain-specific set or not.
```
This is a copy/paste from my other suggestion

Author: fixed in #415

**[2]:** The value SHOULD be normalized to lowercase.

**[3]:** `network.protocol.version` refers to the version of the protocol used and might be different from the protocol client's version. If the HTTP client used has a version of `0.27.2`, but sends HTTP version `1.1`, this attribute should be set to `1.1`.

**[4]:** The value SHOULD be normalized to lowercase.

> Consider always setting the transport when setting a port number, since
> a port number is ambiguous without knowing the transport, for example
> different processes could be listening on TCP port 12345 and UDP port 12345.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Consider always setting the transport when setting a port number, since a port number is ambiguous without knowing the transport. For example, different processes could be listening on TCP port 12345 and UDP port 12345.
```

**[5]:** The value SHOULD be normalized to lowercase.

> **[6]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, `server.address` SHOULD represent
> the server address behind any intermediaries (e.g. proxies) if it's available.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**[6]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, the `server.address` SHOULD represent the server address behind any intermediaries, for example proxies, if it's available.
```

**[7]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, `server.port` SHOULD represent the server port behind any intermediaries (e.g. proxies) if it's available.

`error.type` has the following list of well-known values. If one of them applies, then the respective value MUST be used, otherwise a custom value MAY be used.

| Value  | Description |
|---|---|

> | `_OTHER` | A fallback error value to be used when the instrumentation does not define a custom value for it. |

Reviewer 3: Can you do a global search and replace (as appropriate, and it's generally appropriate) for `does not` to `doesn't`?

Author: done in #415

`network.transport` has the following list of well-known values. If one of them applies, then the respective value MUST be used, otherwise a custom value MAY be used.

| Value  | Description |
|---|---|
| `tcp` | TCP |
| `udp` | UDP |
| `pipe` | Named or anonymous pipe. See note below. |
| `unix` | Unix domain socket |

`network.type` has the following list of well-known values. If one of them applies, then the respective value MUST be used, otherwise a custom value MAY be used.

| Value  | Description |
|---|---|
| `ipv4` | IPv4 |
| `ipv6` | IPv6 |
<!-- endsemconv -->

## Metric: `kestrel.rejected_connections`

<!-- semconv metric.kestrel.rejected_connections(metric_table) -->
| Name     | Instrument Type | Unit (UCUM) | Description    |
| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- |
| `kestrel.rejected_connections` | Counter | `{connection}` | Number of connections rejected by the server. [1] |

> **[1]:** Connections are rejected when the currently active count exceeds the value configured with MaxConcurrentConnections.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**[1]:** Connections are rejected when the currently active count exceeds the value configured with `MaxConcurrentConnections`.
```

Meter name: `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Server.Kestrel`; Added in: ASP.NET Core 8.0
<!-- endsemconv -->

<!-- semconv metric.kestrel.rejected_connections(full) -->
| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| [`network.transport`](../general/attributes.md) | string | [OSI transport layer](https://osi-model.com/transport-layer/) or [inter-process communication method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inter-process_communication). [1] | `tcp`; `unix` | Recommended |
| [`network.type`](../general/attributes.md) | string | [OSI network layer](https://osi-model.com/network-layer/) or non-OSI equivalent. [2] | `ipv4`; `ipv6` | Recommended: if the transport is `tcp` or `udp` |
| [`server.address`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Server address - domain name if available without reverse DNS lookup, otherwise IP address or Unix domain socket name. [3] | `example.com`; `10.1.2.80`; `/tmp/my.sock` | Recommended |
| [`server.port`](../general/attributes.md) | int | Server port number. [4] | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Recommended |

**[1]:** The value SHOULD be normalized to lowercase.

> Consider always setting the transport when setting a port number, since
> a port number is ambiguous without knowing the transport, for example
> different processes could be listening on TCP port 12345 and UDP port 12345.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Consider always setting the transport when setting a port number, since a port number is ambiguous without knowing the transport. For example different processes could be listening on TCP port 12345 and UDP port 12345.
```

**[2]:** The value SHOULD be normalized to lowercase.

> **[3]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, `server.address` SHOULD represent
> the server address behind any intermediaries (e.g. proxies) if it's available.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**[3]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, `server.address` SHOULD represent the server address behind any intermediaries (e.g. proxies) if it's available.
```

**[4]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, `server.port` SHOULD represent the server port behind any intermediaries (e.g. proxies) if it's available.

`network.transport` has the following list of well-known values. If one of them applies, then the respective value MUST be used, otherwise a custom value MAY be used.

| Value  | Description |
|---|---|
| `tcp` | TCP |
| `udp` | UDP |

> | `pipe` | Named or anonymous pipe. See note below. |

Reviewer 3: @tdykstra shouldn't we do a global search and replace of  `See note below.` to `See the following note.` ?

I'm not seeing the note, where's the note?
<img width="403" alt="image" src="https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/assets/3605364/18645aae-a9c8-4775-817e-6369341a2c6d">

I see the note in another document
<img width="507" alt="image" src="https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/assets/3605364/09f0256e-23c6-47f5-8b5c-e9395f402e57">

Reviewer 4: >shouldn't we do a global search and replace of See note below. to See the following note. ?

Yes

Author: fixed in #415

| `unix` | Unix domain socket |

`network.type` has the following list of well-known values. If one of them applies, then the respective value MUST be used, otherwise a custom value MAY be used.

| Value  | Description |
|---|---|
| `ipv4` | IPv4 |
| `ipv6` | IPv6 |
<!-- endsemconv -->

## Metric: `kestrel.queued_connections`

<!-- semconv metric.kestrel.queued_connections(metric_table) -->
| Name     | Instrument Type | Unit (UCUM) | Description    |
| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- |
| `kestrel.queued_connections` | UpDownCounter | `{connection}` | Number of connections that are currently queued and are waiting to start. [1] |

**[1]:** Meter name: `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Server.Kestrel`; Added in: ASP.NET Core 8.0
<!-- endsemconv -->

<!-- semconv metric.kestrel.queued_connections(full) -->
| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| [`network.transport`](../general/attributes.md) | string | [OSI transport layer](https://osi-model.com/transport-layer/) or [inter-process communication method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inter-process_communication). [1] | `tcp`; `unix` | Recommended |

> | [`network.type`](../general/attributes.md) | string | [OSI network layer](https://osi-model.com/network-layer/) or non-OSI equivalent. [2] | `ipv4`; `ipv6` | Recommended: if the transport is `tcp` or `udp` |

Reviewer 3: @tdykstra  should we recommend a global search/replace  of
`| Recommended: if the`
to
`| Recommended  if the`
That is, drop the `:`

Reviewer 4: Yes, and only one space between Recommended and if.

Reviewer 3: If they miss that I'll do a PR fix.

Author: see my other comment on this - https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/283#discussion_r1361413434

| [`server.address`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Server address - domain name if available without reverse DNS lookup, otherwise IP address or Unix domain socket name. [3] | `example.com`; `10.1.2.80`; `/tmp/my.sock` | Recommended |
| [`server.port`](../general/attributes.md) | int | Server port number. [4] | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Recommended |

**[1]:** The value SHOULD be normalized to lowercase.

> Consider always setting the transport when setting a port number, since
> a port number is ambiguous without knowing the transport, for example
> different processes could be listening on TCP port 12345 and UDP port 12345.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Consider always setting the transport when setting a port number, since a port number is ambiguous without knowing the transport. For example, different processes could be listening on TCP port 12345 and UDP port 12345.
```

**[2]:** The value SHOULD be normalized to lowercase.

> **[3]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, `server.address` SHOULD represent
> the server address behind any intermediaries (e.g. proxies) if it's available.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**[3]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, `server.address` SHOULD represent the server address behind any intermediaries (e.g. proxies) if it's available.
```

**[1]:** Meter name: `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Server.Kestrel`; Added in: ASP.NET Core 8.0
<!-- endsemconv -->

<!-- semconv metric.kestrel.queued_requests(full) -->
| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| [`network.protocol.name`](../general/attributes.md) | string | [OSI application layer](https://osi-model.com/application-layer/) or non-OSI equivalent. [1] | `http`; `web_sockets` | Recommended |
| [`network.protocol.version`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Version of the protocol specified in `network.protocol.name`. [2] | `1.1`; `2` | Recommended |
| [`network.transport`](../general/attributes.md) | string | [OSI transport layer](https://osi-model.com/transport-layer/) or [inter-process communication method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inter-process_communication). [3] | `tcp`; `unix` | Recommended |
| [`network.type`](../general/attributes.md) | string | [OSI network layer](https://osi-model.com/network-layer/) or non-OSI equivalent. [4] | `ipv4`; `ipv6` | Recommended: if the transport is `tcp` or `udp` |

> | [`server.address`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Server address - domain name if available without reverse DNS lookup, otherwise IP address or Unix domain socket name. [5] | `example.com`; `10.1.2.80`; `/tmp/my.sock` | Recommended |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| [`server.address`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Server address domain name if available without reverse DNS lookup, otherwise IP address or Unix domain socket name. [5] | `example.com`; `10.1.2.80`; `/tmp/my.sock` | Recommended |
```

If my suggestion is correct, do a global search for `Server address - domain name` because it's confusing.

Author: Fixed in #415

| [`server.port`](../general/attributes.md) | int | Server port number. [6] | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Recommended |

**[1]:** The value SHOULD be normalized to lowercase.

**[2]:** `network.protocol.version` refers to the version of the protocol used and might be different from the protocol client's version. If the HTTP client used has a version of `0.27.2`, but sends HTTP version `1.1`, this attribute should be set to `1.1`.

**[3]:** The value SHOULD be normalized to lowercase.

> Consider always setting the transport when setting a port number, since
> a port number is ambiguous without knowing the transport, for example
> different processes could be listening on TCP port 12345 and UDP port 12345.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Consider always setting the transport when setting a port number, since a port number is ambiguous without knowing the transport. For example, different processes could be listening on TCP port 12345 and UDP port 12345.
```

**[4]:** The value SHOULD be normalized to lowercase.

> **[5]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, `server.address` SHOULD represent
> the server address behind any intermediaries (e.g. proxies) if it's available.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**[5]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, `server.address` SHOULD represent the server address behind any intermediaries (e.g. proxies) if it's available.
```

**[1]:** The counter only tracks HTTP/1.1 connections.

Meter name: `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Server.Kestrel`; Added in: ASP.NET Core 8.0
<!-- endsemconv -->

<!-- semconv metric.kestrel.upgraded_connections(full) -->
| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| [`network.transport`](../general/attributes.md) | string | [OSI transport layer](https://osi-model.com/transport-layer/) or [inter-process communication method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inter-process_communication). [1] | `tcp`; `unix` | Recommended |
| [`network.type`](../general/attributes.md) | string | [OSI network layer](https://osi-model.com/network-layer/) or non-OSI equivalent. [2] | `ipv4`; `ipv6` | Recommended: if the transport is `tcp` or `udp` |
| [`server.address`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Server address - domain name if available without reverse DNS lookup, otherwise IP address or Unix domain socket name. [3] | `example.com`; `10.1.2.80`; `/tmp/my.sock` | Recommended |
| [`server.port`](../general/attributes.md) | int | Server port number. [4] | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Recommended |

**[1]:** The value SHOULD be normalized to lowercase.

> Consider always setting the transport when setting a port number, since
> a port number is ambiguous without knowing the transport, for example
> different processes could be listening on TCP port 12345 and UDP port 12345.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Consider always setting the transport when setting a port number, since a port number is ambiguous without knowing the transport. For example, different processes could be listening on TCP port 12345 and UDP port 12345.
```

**[2]:** The value SHOULD be normalized to lowercase.

> **[3]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, `server.address` SHOULD represent
> the server address behind any intermediaries (e.g. proxies) if it's available.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**[3]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, `server.address` SHOULD represent the server address behind any intermediaries (e.g. proxies) if it's available.
```

|---|---|---|---|---|
| `error.type` | string | The full name of exception type. [1] | `System.OperationCanceledException`; `Contoso.MyException` | Conditionally Required: if and only if an error has occurred. |
| [`network.transport`](../general/attributes.md) | string | [OSI transport layer](https://osi-model.com/transport-layer/) or [inter-process communication method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inter-process_communication). [2] | `tcp`; `unix` | Recommended |
| [`network.type`](../general/attributes.md) | string | [OSI network layer](https://osi-model.com/network-layer/) or non-OSI equivalent. [3] | `ipv4`; `ipv6` | Recommended: if the transport is `tcp` or `udp` |
| [`server.address`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Server address - domain name if available without reverse DNS lookup, otherwise IP address or Unix domain socket name. [4] | `example.com`; `10.1.2.80`; `/tmp/my.sock` | Recommended |
| [`server.port`](../general/attributes.md) | int | Server port number. [5] | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Recommended |
| `tls.protocol.version` | string | TLS protocol version. | `1.2`; `1.3` | Conditionally Required: if the connection is secured with TLS. |

> **[1]:** The `error.type` SHOULD be predictable and SHOULD have low cardinality.
> Instrumentations SHOULD document the list of errors they report.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**[1]:** The `error.type` SHOULD be predictable and SHOULD have low cardinality. Instrumentations SHOULD document the list of errors they report.
```

Author: same as before, new lines don't matter to readers.

Reviewer 3: > same as before, new lines don't matter to readers.

Right, the rendered HTML takes care of it and readers can't tell the difference. But when  we can remove extraneous newlines, it makes maintenance much simpler.

All the MD files that generate HTML for https://learn.microsoft.com/ act the same way.

> The cardinality of `error.type` within one instrumentation library SHOULD be low, but
> telemetry consumers that aggregate data from multiple instrumentation libraries and applications
> should be prepared for `error.type` to have high cardinality at query time, when no
> additional filters are applied.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The cardinality of `error.type` within one instrumentation library SHOULD be low. Telemetry consumers that aggregate data from multiple instrumentation libraries and applications should be prepared for `error.type` to have high cardinality at query time when no additional filters are applied.
```

> If the operation has completed successfully, instrumentations SHOULD NOT set `error.type`.
> 
> If a specific domain defines its own set of error identifiers (such as HTTP or gRPC status codes),
> it's RECOMMENDED to use a domain-specific attribute and also set `error.type` to capture
> all errors, regardless of whether they are defined within the domain-specific set or not.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If a specific domain defines its own set of error identifiers such as HTTP or gRPC status codes, it's RECOMMENDED to:
	* Use a domain-specific attribute.
	* Set the `error.type` to capture on all errors.
	
The preceding recommendation applies regardless of whether they are defined within the domain-specific set or not.
```

Reviewer 4: Whyy does this omit the line that begins "If the operation has completed successfully..."? Also the bulleted lines are indented too far.

> If a specific domain defines its own set of error identifiers (such as HTTP or gRPC status codes),
> it's RECOMMENDED to use a domain-specific attribute and also set `error.type` to capture
> all errors, regardless of whether they are defined within the domain-specific set or not.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If a specific domain defines its own set of error identifiers such as HTTP or gRPC status codes, it's RECOMMENDED to:
* Use a domain-specific attribute.
* Set the `error.type` to capture on all errors.

The preceding recommendation applies regardless of whether they are defined within the domain-specific set or not.
```
@tdykstra  you might need to fix this one.

Reviewer 4: The only change I might make is to apply code style to `capture`

**[2]:** The value SHOULD be normalized to lowercase.

> Consider always setting the transport when setting a port number, since
> a port number is ambiguous without knowing the transport, for example
> different processes could be listening on TCP port 12345 and UDP port 12345.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Consider always setting the transport when setting a port number, since a port number is ambiguous without knowing the transport. For example, different processes could be listening on TCP port 12345 and UDP port 12345.
```

**[3]:** The value SHOULD be normalized to lowercase.

> **[4]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, `server.address` SHOULD represent
> the server address behind any intermediaries (e.g. proxies) if it's available.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**[4]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, `server.address` SHOULD represent
the server address behind any intermediaries (e.g. proxies) if it's available.
```
```suggestion
**[4]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, `server.address` SHOULD represent the server address behind any intermediaries (e.g. proxies) if it's available.
```

Author: #415

**[1]:** Meter name: `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Server.Kestrel`; Added in: ASP.NET Core 8.0
<!-- endsemconv -->

<!-- semconv metric.kestrel.active_tls_handshakes(full) -->
| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| [`network.transport`](../general/attributes.md) | string | [OSI transport layer](https://osi-model.com/transport-layer/) or [inter-process communication method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inter-process_communication). [1] | `tcp`; `unix` | Recommended |
| [`network.type`](../general/attributes.md) | string | [OSI network layer](https://osi-model.com/network-layer/) or non-OSI equivalent. [2] | `ipv4`; `ipv6` | Recommended: if the transport is `tcp` or `udp` |
| [`server.address`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Server address - domain name if available without reverse DNS lookup, otherwise IP address or Unix domain socket name. [3] | `example.com`; `10.1.2.80`; `/tmp/my.sock` | Recommended |
| [`server.port`](../general/attributes.md) | int | Server port number. [4] | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Recommended |

**[1]:** The value SHOULD be normalized to lowercase.

> Consider always setting the transport when setting a port number, since
> a port number is ambiguous without knowing the transport, for example
> different processes could be listening on TCP port 12345 and UDP port 12345.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Consider always setting the transport when setting a port number, since a port number is ambiguous without knowing the transport. For example, different processes could be listening on TCP port 12345 and UDP port 12345.
```
